(GOODS AND SERVICES TAX)GST
Registration under GST Law
Directorate General of Taxpayer Services
CENTRAL BOARD OF INDIRECT TAXES & CUSTOMS
www.cbic.gov.in
Introduction
In any tax system registration is the most fundamental requirement for
identification of tax payers ensuring tax compliance in the economy.
Registration of any business entity under the GST Law implies obtaining a
unique number from the concerned tax authorities for the purpose of
collecting tax on behalf of the government and to avail Input tax credit for
the taxes on his inward supplies. Without registration, a person can neither
collect tax from his customers nor claim any input tax credit of tax paid by
him.
Need and Advantages of Registration
Registration will confer the following advantages to a taxpayer:
•  He is legally recognized as supplier of goods or services
•  He is legally authorized to collect tax from his customers and pass on the
credit of the taxes paid on the goods or services supplied to the
purchasers/ recipients
• He can claim input tax credit of taxes paid on his purchases /
procurements and can utilize the same for payment of taxes due on
supply of goods or services
• Seamless flow of Input tax credit from suppliers to recipients at the
national level.
Liability to Register
GST being a tax on the event of “supply”, every supplier needs to get
registered. However, small businesses having all India aggregate turnover
below Rupees40 Lakh (in case of exclusive supply of goods) (Rupees 20
lakh if business is in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Puducherry, Sikkim, Telangana, Tripura and Uttarakhand)
and Rupees 20 lakhs (in case of supply of services or in case of mixed supplies)
(Rupees 10 lakh if business is in States of Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and
Tripura) need not register.The small businesses, having turnover below the
threshold limit can, however, voluntarily opt to register.
The aggregate turnover includes supplies made by him on behalf of his principals,
but excludes the value of job-worked goods if he is a job worker. But persons
who are engaged exclusively in the business of supplying goods or services
or both that are not liable to tax or wholly exempt from tax or an agriculturist,
to the extent of supply of produce out of cultivation of land are not liable
to register under GST. Also, if all the supplies being made by a supplier are
taxable under reverse charge i.e. where total tax is payable by the recipient
of the goods and / or services, there is no requirement for such a supplier
to register in light of notification No. 5/2017-Central Tax dated 19.06.2017.In
GST, if the supplier supplies outside the State, he is required to take registration
irrespective of the size of his turnover. However, this compulsion is relaxed
for certain categories of suppliers like supplier of handicraft goods, supplier
of services, supplier of job work services. If the turnover of the handicraft supplier is less than specifiedthreshold limit, they will not be required to
register, even if they supply such goods outside the State. In such cases
they will also not be required to obtain registration as a casual taxable personin
other States for making supply of the handicraft goods. Also, small Suppliers
of services, including job workers (except in relation to jewelry, goldsmiths’ and
silversmiths’ wares) whose aggregate turnover is less than Rupees 20/10
lakh limit are exempted from registration, even if they supply services
outside the State.Furthermore, persons supplying services through e-com -
merce operators are also entitled to avail the Rupees 20/10 lakh threshold
exemption for registration.
Nature of Registration
The registration in GST is PAN based and State specific. Supplier has to
register in each of such State or Union territory from where he effects
supply. Area upto 12 nautical miles in the sea is considered part of the
nearest coastal State where the nearestpoint of appropriate base line is
located. Area beyond 12 nautical miles and upto 200 nautical miles, which
is not covered under any Union Territory is considered as a separate Union
territory for the GST law. A person registered in one State is considered
‘unregistered person’ outside the State. If a person has unit in SEZ or is a
SEZ developer and also unit in domestic tariff Area (i.e. outside the SEZ) in
the same State, then he has to take separate registration for his SEZ unit /
as a SEZ developer as a separate place of business of him. If a supplier also
wants to distribute credit to his same-PAN entities, then he will take
separate registration as ‘input service distributor’ in addition to his
registration as ‘supplier’. Unlike service tax regime, the GST law does not
have the facility of centralized registration for units across multiple states.
In GST registration, the supplier is allotted a 15-digit GST identification number
called “GSTIN” and a certificate of registration in corporating there in this
GSTIN is made available to the applicant on the GSTN common portal. The
first 2 digits of the GSTIN is the State code, next 10 digits are the PAN of
the legal entity, the next two digits are for entity code, and the last digit is
check sum number. Registration under GST is not tax specific which means
that there is a single registration for all the taxes i.e. CGST, SGST/UTGST,
IGST and cesses.
Follow us on:
cbicindia @CBIC_India
(GOODS AND SERVICES TAX)GST
Registration under GST Law
Persons supplying services through e-commerce operators need not take
compulsory registration and are entitled to avail the threshold exemption
as per notification No. 65/2017-Central Tax dated 15.11.2017 as amended vide
notification No. 06/2019- Central Tax dated 29.01.2019. TCS shall not apply,
where a person supplies his own product through his own website.
• Those e-commerce operators who are notified as liable for GST payment
under Section 9(5) of the CGST Act, 2017. Service categories notified under
this Section are broadly the services of transportation of passengers (e.g.
by Ola, Uber etc); service of providing accommodation in hotels, inn,
campsites; and housekeeping services like plumbing, carpentering etc.
• TDS Deductor. This covers the authorities notified under notification No.
33/2017-Central Tax dated 15.09.2017, who are mandated to deduct GST TDS
@ 1% on payment made to supplier where value of such supply, under a
contract, is more than Rs. 2.5 lakh.Such authorities are required to register
separately as a TDS deductor irrespective of the turnover, the operation of
tax deduction has been implemented w.e.f 1st October, 2018.
• Input service distributor. They need to separately register as ISD regardless
of the turnover.
• Those supplying online information and data base access or retrieval
services from outside India to a non-registered person in India. A simplified
registration Scheme is provided for OIDAR service suppliers. Instead of
State-wise registration, hewill take single registration for entire India
either himself or through his appointed agent in India, and will pay IGST.
The registration to and other GST compliance by the OIDAR service pro -
viders is exclusively administered by the Principal Commissioner of Central
Tax, Bengaluru West and all officers subordinate to him.
• A casual taxable person is one who has a registered business in some
State in India, but wants to effect supplies from some other State in which
he is not having any fixed place of business. Such person needs to register
in the State from where he seeks to supply as a casual taxable person. A
non-resident taxable person is one who is a foreigner and occasionally
wants to effect taxable supplies from any State in India, and for that he
needs GST registration. GST law prescribes special procedure for registration,
as also for extension of the operation period of such casual or non-resident
taxable persons. They have to apply for registration at least five days in
advance before making any supply. Also, registration is granted to them
or period of operation is extended only after they make advance deposit
of the estimated tax liability. While Income Tax PAN is the basis of GST
registration, the Registration to a non-resident taxable person is given on
the basis of his valid passport (in case of individual) or the Tax Identification
number (TAN) issued by the respective country (if it is incorporated
business entity).
In respect of supplies to some notified agencies of United Nations
organisation, multinational financial institutions and other organisations, a
centralised unique identification number (UIN) is issued.
Standardization of Procedures
A total of 30 forms / formats have been prescribed in the GST registration
rules. For every process in the registration chain such as application for
registration, acknowledgment, query, rejection, registration certificate,
showcause notice for cancellation, reply, amendment, field visit report etc.,
there are standard formats. This will make the process uniform all over the
country. The decision making process will also be fast. Strict time lines have
been stipulated for completion of different stages of registration process.
An application has to be submitted on line through the common portal
(GSTN) within thirty days from the date when liability to register arose. The
casual and non-resident taxable persons need to apply at least five days
prior to the commencement of the business. For transferee of a business as
going concern, the liability to register arises on the date of transfer.
The Proper Officer has to either raise a query or approve the grant of
registration within three working days failing which registration would be
considered as deemed to have been approved. The applicant would have
to respond within seven working days starting from the fourth day of filing
the original application. The proper officer would have to grant or reject the
application for registration within seven working days thereafter. A given PAN based legal entity would have one GSTIN per State, that means
a business entity having its branches in multiple States will have to take
separate State-wise registration for the branches in different States.  But
a person having multiple places of business in a State or Union territory
may be granted a separate registration for each such place of business.Fur -
ther a unit in SEZ or a SEZ developer needs to necessarily obtain separate
registration. Every registered person is required to display his certificate of
registration in a prominent location at his principal place of business and at
every additional place of business. He is also required to display his GSTIN
on the name board exhibited at the said places.
Generally, the liability to register under GST arises when you are a “supplier”
within the meaning of the term, and also if your aggregate turn over in
the financial year is above the specified exemption threshold. However,
the GST law enlists certain categories of suppliers who are required to get
compulsory registration irrespective of their turnover that is to say, the
specified threshold exemption limit is not available to them. Some of such
suppliers who need to register compulsorily irrespective of the size of their
turnover are those who are, -
• Inter-state suppliers. However, persons making inter-state supplies of
taxable services and having an aggregate turnover, to be computed on
all India basis, not exceeding an amount of twenty lakh rupees (ten lakh
rupees in States of Manipur, Mizoram, Nagalandand Tripura) are exempted
from obtaining registration vide notification No. 10/2017-Integrated Tax
dated 13.10.2017 as amended vide notification No. 03/2019- Integrated Tax
dated 29.01.2019. Also, vide notification No. 03/2018-Integrated Tax dated
22.10.2018, the Inter-state suppliers of handicraft goods are exempted from
compulsory registration till they cross the specifiedexemption threshold.
• A person receiving supplies on which tax is payable by recipient on reverse
charge basis. This covers the reverse charge on receipt of notified goods or
services under Section 9(3) of CGST Act and 5(3) of IGST Act, and not those
under Section 9(4) of CGST Act and Section 5(4) of the IGST Act. The goods
so notified are cashew nuts, bidi wrapper leaves, tobacco leaves, silk yarn
and raw cotton supplied by agriculturist, used vehicles, seized and
confiscated goods, old and used goods, waste and scrap supplied by
Government. The services notified for reverse charge include import of
service, Goods transport agency service, legal services provided by
advocates, certain services provided by Government, services supplied by
an insurance agent or recovery agent, services by way of granting
sponsorship, inward ocean freight services etc. However if all the supplies
being made by the supplier are taxable under reverse charge where no
tax is payable by the supplier on goods or services or both, then there is
no such requirement for such supplier to register in light of notification
No.05/2017- Central tax dated 19.06.2017.
• Casual taxable person who is not having fixed place of business in the
State or Union Territory from where he wants to make supply. However
casual taxable persons making supplies of specified handicraft goods need
not take compulsory registration and are entitled to the threshold exemption
limit. Handicraft goods are specified in Explanation to notification No.
21/2018- Central Tax (Rate) dated 26.07.2018.
• Non-resident taxable persons who are not having fixed place of business
or residence in India. ‘Non-resident taxable persons’ and ‘Casual taxable
persons’ can make taxable supplies only after obtaining the registration
and they have to deposit in advance the estimated tax liability at the time
of applying for the registration. They are given registration with 90 days’
validity, which can be extended on need based basis for another 90 days.
• A person who supplies on behalf of some other taxable person (i.e.
an Agent of some Principal). This covers ‘Consignment Agents’ or ‘C&F
Agents’, and not ‘Commission Agent’. A commission agent does not
affectsupply; he only facilitates it. The scope of agent and principal has
been clarified vide Circular No. 73/47/2018-GST dated 05.11.2018.
• An e-commerce operator, who is required to collect tax at source under
section 52, who provide platform to the suppliers to make supply through
it.Suppliers of goods who supply through such e-commerce operator who
are liable to collect tax at source to the extent of 2% [1% CGST + 1% SGST/
UTGST or 2% IGST] while making payment to the respective supplier.
Follow us on:
cbicindia @CBIC_India(GOODS AND SERVICES TAX)GST
Registration under GST Law
Amendment of Registration
Except for the changes in some core information in the registration
application, a taxable person shall be able to make amendments without
requiring any specific approval from the tax authority. In case the change
is for legal name of the business, or the State of place of business or
additional place of business, the taxable person will apply for amendment
within 15 days of the event necessitating the change. The proper officer,
then, will approve the amendment within next 15 days. For other
changes like name of day to day functionaries, e-mail Ids, Mobile numbers
etc. no approval of the proper officer is required, and the amendment can
be affected by the taxable person on his own on the common portal.A
functionality to update email and mobile number of the authorised signatory
is available in the GST system. The taxpayers can get it done by the
concerned jurisdictional tax authority. Generally, the amendments take
effect from the date of application for amendment. Commissioner,
however, has been given powers to permit amendments with
retrospective effect.
Cancellation of Registration
The GST law provides for two scenarios where cancellation of registration
can take place; the one when the taxable person no more requires it
(voluntary cancellation), and another when the proper officer considers
the registration liable for cancellation in view of certain specified defaults
(Suo-moto cancellation) like when the registrant is not doing business from
the registered place of business or if he issues tax invoice without making
the supply of goods or services. The taxable person desirous of cancellation
of Registration will apply on the common portal within 30 days of event
warranting cancellation. He will also declare in the application the stock
held on the date preceding to the date with effect from which he seeks
cancellation. He will also work out and declare the quantum of dues of
payments and credit reversal, and the particulars of payments made
towards discharge of such liabilities.
Till 23.01.2018, the voluntary registration taken despite not being liable for
obtaining registration could not be cancelled until expiry of one year. However,
the rule has now been amended to allow voluntary registration to be
cancelled any time. In all the aforesaid cases of cancellation, the proper
officer, if satisfied, has to cancel the registration within 30 days from the
date of application or the date of reply to notice (if issued, when rejection
is concluded by the officer).
Suspension of Registration
i. Where a registered person has applied forcancellation of registration, the
registration shall be deemed to besuspended from the date of submission of
the application or the date from which thecancellation is sought, whichever is
later, pending the completion of proceedings for cancellation of registration.
ii. Where the proper officer has reasons to believe that the registration of
a person isliable to be cancelled under section 29, he may suspend the reg -
istration of such person with effect from a date to be determined by him,
pending the completion of the proceedings for cancellation of registration.
iii. A registered person, whose registration has been suspended, shall not
make any taxable supply during the period of suspension and shall not be
required to furnish any monthly / quarterly return.
Revocation of Cancellation
i. When the  registration has been cancelled by the Proper Officer
(Superintend ent of Central Tax) on his own motion and not on the basis of
an application by the registered person, then the registered person, whose
registration has been  cancelled, can submit an application for revocation of
cancellation of registration, in FORM GST REG-21, to the Proper Officer (As -
sistant or Deputy Commissioners of Central Tax), within a period of thirty
days from the date of the service of the order of cancellation of registration
at the common portal, either directly or through a Facilitation Centre notified
by the Commissioner.
ii. However, if the registration has been cancelled for failure to furnish returns,
application for revocation shall be filed, only after such returns are
furnished and any amount due as tax, in terms of such returns, has been
paid along with any amount payable towards interest, penalty and late fee
in respect of the said returns.iii. On examination of the application, if the Proper Officer (Assistant or
Deputy Commissioners of Central Tax) is satisfied, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, that there are sufficient grounds for revocation of
cancellation of registration, then he shall revoke the cancellation of
registration by an order in FORM GST REG-22 within a period of thirty days
from the date of the receipt of the application and communicate the same
to the applicant.
iv.  However, if on examination of the application for revocation, if the
Proper Officer (Assistant or Deputy Commissioners of Central Tax) is not
satisfied then he will issue a notice in FORM GST REG–23 requiring the
applicant to show cause as to why the application submitted for revocation
should not be rejected and the applicant has to furnish the reply within a
period of seven working days from the date of the service of the notice in
FORM GST REG-24.
v. Upon receipt of the information or clarification in FORM GST REG-24, the
Proper Officer (Assistant or Deputy Commissioners of Central Tax) shall
dispose of the application within a period of thirty days from the date of
the receipt of such information or clarification from the applicant. In case
the information or clarification provided is satisfactory, the Proper Officer
(Assistant or Deputy Commissioners of Central Tax) shall dispose the
application as per para (iii) above. In case it is not satisfactory the applicant
will be mandatorily given an opportunity of being heard, after which the
Proper Officer (Assistant or Deputy Commissioners of Central Tax) after
recording the reasons in writing may by an order in FORM GST REG- 05,
reject the application for revocation of cancellation of registration and
communicate the same to the applicant.
vi. The revocation of cancellation of registration under the SGST Act or the
UTGST Act, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a revocation of
cancellation of registration under CGST Act.
Physical Verification in Connection with Registration
Physical verification is to be resorted to only where it is found necessary
in the subjective satisfaction of the proper officer. If at all, it is felt necessary,
it will be undertaken only after granting the registration and the verification
report along with the supporting documents and photographs shall have to be
uploaded on the common portal within fifteen working days.